Task-Adaptive Grounded 3D-Programmers Using 2D VLMs
Arman Raayatsanati1,*,†
Sombit Dey2,*
Anna-Maria Halacheva2,*
Jan-Nico Zaech2
Luc Van Gool2
Danda Pani Paudel2
1TextQL
2INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”
Figure 1. Today, 2D VLMs lack the zero-shot capacity to generate, modify, or reason about 3D assets. To bridge this gap, we introduce
3D-Prog, a modular and flexible framework for 3D visual programming. By leveraging the semantic reasoning of 2D VLMs, 3D-Prog acts
as a 3D programmer that interprets multi-view 2D visualizations of a 3D asset within a canonical frame. The 3D-Prog approach addresses
a broad range of 3D tasks spanning generation, understanding, and compositional reasoning.
Abstract
Recent vision-language models (VLMs) exhibit remarkable
generalization and reasoning abilities, yet 3D understand-
ing in these models is limited by data scale, training diver-
sity, and reasoning capacity. Instead of naively extending
these models into 3D, we take a different approach: we en-
able powerful 2D VLMs to operate reliably in 3D by in-
troducing 3D grounding and iterative feedback loops with
two novel concepts: Canonical Coordinate Framing (CCF)
and Task-Adaptive Feedback (TAF). CCF serves as a unified
visual representation that anchors both inputs and outputs
to a shared Euclidean coordinate system, solving common
challenges in 3D grounding such as axis ambiguity, incon-
sistent metric scale, and floating references. Complemen-
tary to this structured framing of the 3D inputs, TAF closes
*Equal contribution.
†Research done as part of an ETH Zurich MSc thesis hosted by INSAIT.
the reasoning loop with task-adaptive dynamic feedback
that enables 2D VLMs to perform varied open-vocabulary
tasks within their native visual context.
Building on this foundation, we introduce 3D-Prog, a
3D understanding, reasoning, and generation framework
that jointly employs the capabilities of CCF and TAF to-
gether with powerful VLMs. Without requiring any retrain-
ing, 3D-Prog performs open-vocabulary 3D understanding,
manipulation, and generation across both object-level and
scene-level tasks. Our experiments show that the joint use
of CCF and TAF transforms 2D VLMs into geometry-aware
3D programmers, achieving consistent, interpretable, and
high-quality results across diverse 3D tasks.
1. Introduction
The pursuit of general-purpose 3D understanding and ma-
nipulation systems has traditionally relied on specialized
1
arXiv:2610.02021v1  [cs.CV]  1 Oct 2026


models, each tailored for a specific geometric task [26, 33,
55]. Whether converting scanned objects into simulation-
ready models, segmenting parts, or composing scenes from
language, these systems depend on extensive 3D anno-
tations, domain expertise, and task-specific training [17,
24, 42, 43]. This specialization fragments the 3D ecosys-
tem and limits scalability to diverse real-world 3D tasks in
robotics, graphics, and vision.
Meanwhile, vision-language models (VLMs) trained on
massive 2D image-text corpora have demonstrated remark-
able generalization, compositional reasoning, and zero-shot
learning abilities [11, 14, 47]. Yet, despite their semantic
power, these models operate within the 2D image manifold
and lack explicit grounding in metric 3D space [51]. Emerg-
ing 3D VLMs attempt to bridge this gap, but their gen-
eralization remains constrained by limited data scale and
diversity [25, 56]. As a result, neither approach provides
sufficient performance; directly prompting 2D VLMs for
3D quantities leads to unstable and inconsistent predictions
[51], while 3D VLMs lack a diversity of capabilities [56].
We address this challenge by introducing a task-adaptive
and grounded 3D programming system built on two novel
VLM communication mechanisms:
Canonical Coordi-
nate Framing (CCF) for 3D grounding and Task-Adaptive
Feedback (TAF). CCF anchors both inputs and outputs to
a shared Euclidean coordinate system by rendering multi-
view orthographic projections with explicit, visible axes,
metric scale marks, and a fixed global origin. These vi-
sual cues eliminate what we call coordinate-frame ambi-
guity and allow 2D VLMs to perform spatial reasoning
within a consistent geometric frame. While spatial ground-
ing is necessary, it is often insufficient for complex tasks.
To address this, we propose TAF, which provides an itera-
tive execution-based feedback loop that serves as a versatile
reasoning scratch-space for task-specific information, from
physical material descriptions to layout reasoning. Unlike
approaches that attempt to merely extend VLMs into 3D
with limited data, the combination of CCF and TAF em-
powers existing 2D models to reason metrically by ground-
ing 3D understanding visually, without retraining or archi-
tectural modification. This design transforms pretrained 2D
VLMs into geometry-aware systems capable of interpret-
ing, editing, and generating 3D content.
Building on this foundation, we introduce 3D-Prog, a
3D reasoning and generation framework that utilizes our
task-adaptive and grounded 3D representation.
3D-Prog
takes 3D assets such as point clouds, meshes, or Univer-
sal Scene Description (USD) scenes along with a natural-
language instruction, carries out task-specific analysis, and
generates a structured 3D manipulation program. Each line
in the program invokes modules for geometric analysis, 3D
manipulation, or visual feedback in canonical coordinates.
The generated programs consume and produce intermedi-
ate results, forming self-contained reasoning chains that are
interpretable and executable.
The outputs are written in
the USD format, providing a modular, hierarchical, and in-
terpretable representation that is naturally compatible with
both 2D VLMs and 3D editing workflows.
Without any retraining or fine-tuning, 3D-Prog performs
remarkably well on open-vocabulary 3D understanding,
manipulation, and synthesis across object-level and scene-
level tasks. It unifies 3D perception, reasoning, and gen-
eration in a visually grounded framework, demonstrating
that explicit canonical framing is a prerequisite for ro-
bust geometry-aware multimodal reasoning.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
• Canonical Coordinate Framing (CCF): a representation
that visually grounds 3D reasoning for 2D VLMs by en-
forcing a shared Euclidean coordinate system for inputs
and outputs, resolving the coordinate-frame ambiguity.
• Task-Adaptive Feedback (TAF): a reasoning scratch-
space that enables a CCF-guided VLM to break out of
purely geometric reasoning and perform generalist, task-
adaptive reasoning over 3D assets.
• 3D-Prog: a 3D understanding, reasoning, and generation
framework building on CCF and TAF. We show that 2D
VLMs embedded in 3D-Prog achieve consistent, inter-
pretable, and high-quality results across diverse 3D tasks,
without task-specific training or fine-tuning.
2. Related Work
2D VLMs and Emergent Spatial Understanding. Vision-
language models (VLMs) [3, 11, 14, 22, 47] have demon-
strated remarkable multimodal reasoning capabilities across
a wide range of 2D tasks, from image captioning to open-
world recognition and VQA. Despite being trained on 2D
image-text pairs, these models exhibit emergent spatial and
physical understanding: they can ground language in object
relations, infer affordances, and even support world mod-
els and embodied reasoning frameworks [6, 7, 27, 34, 40].
However, their spatial reasoning remains implicitly en-
coded within 2D coordinates. As recent evaluations high-
light [8, 21, 34, 51], these models lack explicit 3D consis-
tency and cannot directly produce geometry-grounded out-
puts, limiting their use in 3D reasoning and manipulation.
3D-aware VLMs:
Bridging to 3D Understanding.
To overcome these limitations, several works have intro-
duced 3D-aware VLMs that explicitly model spatial struc-
ture or leverage 3D supervision. Some approaches employ
3D backbones [9, 18–20, 38, 57], e.g., point transform-
ers, while others extend 2D models, e.g., with multi-view
consistency [16, 23, 31, 46, 54]. These methods achieve
strong grounding in 3D perception and have been applied
to both understanding tasks (e.g., 3D captioning, ground-
ing, QA) and generation tasks (e.g., text-to-3D synthesis,
scene reconstruction).
Despite their promising progress,
2


Figure 2.
CCF Overview. The CCF transforms an input 3D asset into a spatially grounded 2D visual prompt by rendering its six
orthographic views, each featuring a fixed origin, visible axes, and metric scale marks.
these 3D-aware VLMs remain constrained by limited mul-
timodal 3D datasets and task-specific training objectives,
which hinder their ability to generalize across domains and
tasks as broadly as 2D VLMs do [48]. Moreover, exist-
ing 3D VLMs typically specialize in either language under-
standing of 3D assets (e.g., captioning, grounding, VQA)
[9, 18, 20, 30, 38, 58] or 3D output generation (e.g., text-
to-3D synthesis) [31, 46], rather than offering a unified and
flexible framework for both understanding and manipula-
tion.
Visual Programming and Programmatic Reasoning.
Beyond model-centric approaches, visual programming
frameworks have emerged as a complementary paradigm
for integrating perception, reasoning, and action through
modular composition. Neural Module Networks [2] pio-
neered this direction by decomposing visual question an-
swering into structured, executable programs. Building on
this idea, recent works such as VisProg [15], ViperGPT
[45], and VADAR [37] demonstrate that complex visual
tasks can be represented as modular programs, differing
mainly in their approach to program synthesis and API gen-
eration. However, this entire line of work remains focused
on 2D vision tasks (e.g., detection, VQA, image editing),
and thus cannot ingest or operate directly on 3D visual in-
puts. Efforts towards 3D visual program synthesis have so
far been domain-specific, targeting single tasks [32, 36, 53]
or specialized 3D asset types [35], which limits their gen-
erality.
In contrast, 3D-Prog supports diverse 3D assets
spanning synthetic and scanned data across varying levels
of granularity (object- and scene-level), and enables a wide
range of 3D tasks, including generation, editing, and under-
standing.
3. Method
This section presents 3D-Prog, our approach for convert-
ing 2D VLMs into 3D programmers capable of generation,
understanding, manipulation, and reasoning over 3D assets.
To enable 2D VLMs to interact with 3D assets, we first pro-
pose a 3D framing protocol, CCF, aimed at grounding the
3D inputs to a canonical Euclidean space via images, as ex-
plained in Sec. 3.1. To support an open-ended range of 3D
tasks, we further propose TAF, which allows the model to
request and utilize dynamic visual feedback tailored to the
instruction, explained in Sec. 3.2. Finally, Sec. 3.3 presents
the 3D-Prog framework, which integrates these compo-
nents into a unified system capable of performing diverse
and complex 3D programming tasks.
3.1. Canonical Coordinate Framing
CCF is a 3D grounding representation strategy that visually
anchors both 3D inputs and outputs within a shared global
Euclidean coordinate system, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Specif-
ically, we render a single visualization with six orthographic
projections of the 3D asset, along with a supplementary per-
spective view for spatial context. The projections share a)
visible and labeled X, Y , and Z axes, b) metric scale cues
via axis markings, and c) a fixed reference origin anchored
to the asset’s bounding box across all views.
By representing 3D geometry through consistent multi-
view visual-linguistic cues, CCF removes gauge ambigui-
ties and establishes a stable and grounded spatial reference
for reasoning. CCF shares its principles with various geo-
metric methods such as DUSt3R [50], MASt3R [29], and
VGGT [49] to achieve multi-view consistency in a shared
canonical space, enforcing coherence across viewpoints.
Within this canonical frame, the VLM is prompted to ex-
press predicted 3D coordinates and spatial relationships di-
rectly.
Why Do Other Designs Fail? We observe that designs
lacking explicit metric grounding exhibit degenerate behav-
iors, as summarized in Tab. 1. Without a visible coordinate
frame, VLMs struggle to maintain orientation, scale, and
metric consistency across views.
By introducing a visible and shared Euclidean reference,
CCF transforms pretrained 2D VLMs into reliable 3D rea-
soning engines. It enables a) consistent spatial queries (dis-
tance, adjacency, containment), b) geometry-aware visual
3


Figure 3. 3D-Prog Overview. Before being passed to 3D-Prog, the user input is pre-processed by the CCF. Within 3D-Prog, a 2D VLM
generates Python code for both (1) Task-Adaptive Analysis and (2) asset generation. A Judge module evaluates this feedback and either
confirms the task is complete or provides (3) Iterative Prompt Feedback, comprising both visual and textual cues, which is fed back to the
2D VLM for iterative refinement.
Table 1. Failure analysis of ungrounded designs. Explicit metric
grounding is essential for stable and interpretable 3D reasoning.
Missing Design Element
Observed Failure Mode
No visible axes
Orientation ambiguity
No axis markings or values
Inconsistent scale
Perspective-only projections
Metric distortion
Parametric-only 3D outputs
Floating reference frame
grounding across dialogue turns, c) controllable and in-
terpretable 3D scene editing, and d) multi-view alignment
without pose metadata.
We conclude that 3D grounding through explicit canoni-
cal framing is a prerequisite for robust geometry-aware mul-
timodal interaction.
3.2. Task-Adaptive Feedback
A key capability of a generalist 3D programmer is the abil-
ity to request and obtain task-relevant feedback. While CCF
enables seamless interaction between 3D assets and VLMs,
the generated asset may still fall short of the task require-
ments.
To bridge this gap, we propose TAF, a mechanism that
establishes a task-dependent feedback loop between the
VLM and its generated content. Concretely, we link the
VLM to a Python execution environment, enabling it to pro-
duce TAF as visual feedback. In each iteration, the VLM
generates USD manipulation code and task-specific analy-
sis code that programmatically inspects the current 3D as-
set, producing diagnostic visualizations (e.g., height distri-
butions, density heatmaps, segmentation overlays). These
visual outputs are rendered and fed back to the VLM along-
side the updated CCF views of the generated asset, form-
ing an iterative loop in which the VLM identifies dis-
crepancies, refines its hypotheses, and corrects its output
based on concrete evidence from the asset itself.
The
VLM autonomously determines what intermediate analysis
is needed for a given task, allowing TAF to range from plot-
ting material properties and assessing physical plausibility
to running non-trivial operations such as DBSCAN cluster-
ing to isolate object parts for segmentation (see Fig. 5).
3.3. 3D-Prog Framework
Building upon CCF and TAF, we introduce 3D-Prog, a gen-
eralist 3D programming framework that leverages the broad
semantic and reasoning capabilities of the 2D VLM to op-
erate effectively on 3D assets. 3D-Prog transforms VLMs
into 3D programmers capable of carrying out a wide range
of tasks without requiring task-specific supervision or adap-
tation. Our framework is designed around three core princi-
ples: (1) CCF expresses 3D assets in a canonical frame,
providing grounding cues that enable VLMs trained on
2D data to infer spatial relationships; (2) TAF equips the
system with an iterative feedback mechanism that closes
the loop between generation and evaluation; and (3) the
USD format, with its hierarchical and compositional na-
ture, aligns scene representation with VLM reasoning pat-
terns, enabling complex 3D transformations to be decom-
posed into interpretable programmatic steps.
Following these principles, the architecture comprises
three primary modules:
2D VLM for perception: CCF-rendered views of the
3D assets serve as the perceptual input to the VLM. Condi-
tioned on these renders and the task description, the VLM
produces a) semantic and geometric interpretations of the
scene and b) executable code that governs the manipulation
of the 3D asset. The generated code is executed inside a
4


Python environment, which provides the essential capabil-
ities of TAF and USD manipulation, enabling the VLM to
construct, edit, or transform the underlying USD scene via
OpenUSD in Python.
Judge: To provide critical feedback, a separate Judge
VLM evaluates the proposed solution. The generated USD
asset is rendered and overlaid with the reference model’s
CCF representation (Sec. 3.1) to provide iterative visual
feedback to the VLM. The judge evaluates the solution
based on the user task prompt, comparative visual feedback,
and TAF-produced visual analysis. The evaluation yields
a structured response comprising a binary completion sta-
tus, a confidence score, and a diagnostic report (a feedback
comment alongside lists of detected errors and prescriptive
suggestions). The judge response is appended to the Python
output to guide the VLM in subsequent iterations.
Iterative Refinement through TAF: The judge feed-
back and TAF-produced diagnostic visualizations are fed
back to the VLM, which generates an updated USD asset in
the next iteration. This TAF-driven loop allows the VLM to
correct trivial mistakes (such as faulty USD code, incorrect
axes, or wrong rotations), improve geometric fidelity based
on visual evidence from its own analysis, and progressively
refine its output from coarse to fine-grained solutions. The
process continues until the task is successfully completed or
a predefined maximum number of iterations is reached.
3.4. Generalization of 3D-Prog
3D-Prog handles a wide range of 3D vision tasks within
a unified framework, spanning three functional domains:
generation (object completion, Scan2Sim), understand-
ing (detection, segmentation, editing, QA, captioning), and
reasoning (compositional scene building, articulation pre-
diction). A detailed task breakdown is provided in the Sup-
plementary Material, Tab. S1.
By expressing all outputs as USD code, diverse 3D ob-
jectives become instances of the same composable repre-
sentation that can be inspected, edited, and executed across
standard USD-based toolchains. This unified abstraction al-
lows a single system to analyze, modify, and construct 3D
scenes from natural-language or visual instructions, posi-
tioning USD as a lingua franca for 3D understanding and
generation. The range of tasks spans both synthetic and
real-world 3D assets at object and scene scales, demonstrat-
ing the generalization of 3D-Prog across asset types.
Within 3D generation, the system performs tasks that
synthesize or transform raw geometry into simulation-ready
assets, such as object completion and “Scan2Sim” recon-
struction. To facilitate 3D understanding, 3D-Prog inter-
prets and structures data across geometrical, spatial, visual,
contextual, and semantic-spatial dimensions, enabling tasks
such as object detection or object editing. Finally, reason-
ing tasks are a core capability, e.g., predicting articulation
Table 2. Comparison of 3D-Prog with closed (Gemini 2.5 Pro,
GPT-5.2, Claude Sonnet 4.5) and open (Kimi K2.5) 2D VLMs on
generation, understanding, and reasoning tasks in 3D. 3D-Prog (C)
and (K) use Claude and Kimi as backbones. ✗denotes failure to
produce valid USD outputs.
Closed Models
Open Models
Task
Gemini
GPT
Claude
3D-Prog
(C)
Kimi
3D-Prog
(K)
Generation
Object Compl. (Chamfer ↓)
1.17
0.51
0.42
0.19
0.45
0.16
Scan2Sim (Chamfer ↓)
✗
✗
✗
0.08
✗
0.09
Understanding
Object Det. (mAP ↑)
0.00
0.16
0.04
0.38
0.02
0.04
Instance Seg. (mAP ↑)
0.18
0.28
0.21
0.42
0.22
0.43
Semantic Seg. (mIoU ↑)
0.48
0.47
0.48
0.53
0.47
0.52
Object Editing (User ↑)
1.40
1.40
4.00
4.80
3.59
3.59
Reasoning
Composition (User ↑)
2.70
2.35
2.00
4.60
3.00
3.70
Articulation (Axis Err ↓)
86.58
90.00
86.94
3.50
89.61
0.64
and composing coherent scenes from discrete objects.
4. Experiments
We evaluate 3D-Prog through task benchmarks, ablation
studies, experiments across diverse VLM families, and spa-
tial robustness analysis. We demonstrate that 2D VLMs,
when grounded via CCF and paired with TAF, can perform
diverse 3D programming tasks effectively.
Datasets. We evaluate 3D-Prog on diverse 3D program-
ming tasks spanning generation, understanding, and reason-
ing (Tab. S1), covering both object- and scene-level settings
with synthetic and real-world data. For Scan2Sim and artic-
ulation prediction, we use real-world scans and annotations
from the Articulate3D dataset [17] at the object and scene
levels, respectively. Semantic and instance part segmen-
tation, object editing, and object completion use synthetic
assets from Objaverse-XL [13] and Pixar’s OpenUSD as-
set library [44], which provide ground-truth part segmen-
tations and semantic labels.
For object editing, we cu-
rate assets to maximize geometric and visual complexity;
for object completion, inputs are generated by removing
pre-segmented object parts. For object detection, we com-
bine synthetic data [44] with high-quality laser scans from
ScanNet++ [52], which includes human-annotated segmen-
tations. Finally, compositional reasoning is evaluated us-
ing five natural-language queries describing complex multi-
object indoor environments.
The full system and judge
prompts are provided in the supplementary material.
Metrics. We evaluate 3D-Prog using task-specific met-
rics as well as human judgment to capture both geometric
fidelity and semantic plausibility. For object-level percep-
tion, we report mean Average Precision (mAP) for detec-
tion and instance segmentation and mean Intersection over
Union (mIoU) for semantic segmentation. Geometric re-
5


construction quality for object completion and Scan2Sim is
quantified using Chamfer distance, while articulation accu-
racy is measured via the median motion axis error. For ob-
ject editing and compositional reasoning, where automated
metrics often fail to capture nuance, we conduct a user study
with four participants. Each instance is evaluated against
five task-specific success criteria and scored on a 0–5 scale.
We report the mean score aggregated across all samples and
evaluators. Detailed success criteria and user study proto-
cols are provided in the supplementary material (Sec. C).
Setup. We evaluate task performance across a diverse
selection of 2D VLMs, including the proprietary systems
Claude Sonnet 4.5 [3], Gemini 2.5 Pro [11], and GPT-
5.2 [41], as well as the open-source Kimi K2.5 [28] model.
Additionally, we instantiate open-source and closed-source
variants of 3D-Prog using the top-performing open-source
and proprietary VLMs as their respective foundational
cores. The iterative refinement process is capped at 20 it-
erations, with an early stopping condition triggered upon
approval by the judge. If the iteration limit is reached, the
terminal output is recorded as the final result. Performance
for each task is quantified as the mean score across five dis-
tinct assets.
Baselines and Ablations.
In the main comparison
(Tab. 2), we evaluate four standalone 2D VLMs as base-
lines: Gemini 2.5 Pro, GPT-5.2, Claude Sonnet 4.5, and
Kimi K2.5. We instantiate 3D-Prog with Claude and Kimi
as backbones, as they are the overall top-performing closed-
source and open-source baselines, respectively. The pri-
mary distinction between a baseline and its 3D-Prog variant
is the omission of CCF and TAF; baselines are otherwise
granted identical task prompts. Claude Sonnet 4.5 is addi-
tionally used as the dedicated baseline for ablation studies,
robustness testing, and 3D VLM comparisons, as it demon-
strated the highest aggregate performance among all evalu-
ated 2D VLMs.
4.1. Results and Analysis
We evaluate 3D-Prog across the tasks introduced in Sec. 3.4
against diverse VLM baselines. Shown in Tab. 2, 3D-Prog
consistently outperforms or matches both proprietary and
open-source baselines across all benchmarks, demonstrat-
ing how 3D-Prog equips VLMs with 3D generative, under-
standing, and reasoning capabilities.
For generative tasks, 3D-Prog is able to simplify and
complete both dense complex object scans and synthetic
assets (e.g., 0.19 Chamfer distance for synthetic data com-
pletion and 0.08 for Scan2Sim), indicating high geometric
fidelity. The Scan2Sim task shows a critical point of model
capabilities, as all baseline models proved incapable of gen-
erating valid USD files from real-world data. These failures
stem from either (a) non-compliance with simplification in-
structions, leading to context window overflow during the
Table 3. Ablation results on diverse tasks spanning generation and
understanding.
3D-Prog
Claude
w/o CCF
w/o TAF
Instance Segmentation (mAP ↑)
0.42
0.21
0.30
0.29
Object Detection (mAP ↑)
0.38
0.04
0.01
0.11
Object Completion (Chamfer ↓)
0.19
0.42
0.33
0.58
ingestion of dense meshes, or (b) catastrophic geometric
loss caused by the models’ inability to reconcile real-world
scan noise and topological inconsistencies.
3D-Prog further demonstrates strong performance on 3D
understanding tasks. Object detection and instance segmen-
tation performance nearly double, confirming significantly
improved 3D spatial reasoning at both the scene and object
levels. Furthermore, user study results for object editing
favor 3D-Prog, indicating capabilities that extend beyond
pure geometric understanding.
3D-Prog exhibits robust spatial reasoning, evidenced by
its articulation predictions. It correctly identifies the motion
type in every case and predicts the motion axis with a me-
dian error of 3.5◦and 0.6◦with the Claude and Kimi back-
bones, whereas standalone 2D VLMs err by nearly 90◦. In
the compositional reasoning task, evaluators show a strong
preference for the scenes generated by 3D-Prog, highlight-
ing their superior geometric and visual quality. Assets gen-
erated by 3D-Prog exhibit clean geometry with no part or
object-level intersections, representative shapes for each ob-
ject class, and realistic scale, materials, and color, leading
to visually coherent and physically plausible compositions.
In contrast, baseline outputs often contain non-distinctive
geometry, unrealistic element proportions, detached com-
ponents, and frequent mesh intersections between separate
parts, resulting in visually unstable or semantically incon-
sistent scenes. Qualitative comparisons are shown in Fig. 4,
with detailed analysis of evaluator feedback from both user
studies provided in the Suppl. material (Sec. C).
4.2. Ablation Study
We conduct ablation studies to examine the role of the CCF
and TAF across various asset categories and both under-
standing and generative tasks, as shown in Tab. 3. Specifi-
cally, we assess 3D-Prog across three distinct benchmarks:
(a) instance segmentation, to evaluate fine-grained geomet-
ric and object-level comprehension; (b) object detection,
to probe scene-level understanding; and (c) object comple-
tion, to demonstrate the model’s integrated capacity for ge-
ometric analysis and generative synthesis. The results con-
firm that CCF and TAF are complementary. CCF provides
the geometric grounding essential for metric reasoning—
without it, completion Chamfer distance worsens from 0.19
to 0.33 and detection mAP collapses from 0.38 to 0.01. TAF
enables iterative error correction; its removal eliminates the
6


Figure 4. Qualitative results of 3D-Prog with Claude and Kimi backbones vs Baselines on Compositional Reasoning. Prompt: “Generate
a simple bookshelf with 3 books.”
Table 4. Robustness to geometric perturbations. Chamfer dis-
tance (↓) on an object completion asset when the input and its
ground truth are translated along Y or rotated about Z; 3D-Prog
(Claude backbone) vs. the Claude Sonnet 4.5 baseline. The aver-
age Chamfer distance is calculated over the six perturbed settings.
Original
Translated (Y)
Rotated (Z)
Avg.
Method
+10cm
+20cm
+30cm
+15°
+30°
+45°
3D-Prog
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.07
0.18
0.05
Claude
0.02
0.38
0.44
0.11
0.33
0.18
0.17
0.27
refinement loop, causing a 3× degradation (0.19 to 0.58).
This disentangles the contribution: CCF grounds spatial un-
derstanding, while TAF provides the iterative scaffold for
complex tasks. Specifically, omitting CCF restricts the vi-
sual prompt to a single orthographic view without coordi-
nate framing, introducing inaccurate initial coordinate esti-
mates that the VLM cannot rectify. Similarly, omitting TAF
removes the task-adaptive analysis that drives the iterative
refinement loop, reducing the system to a single generation
pass. Without iterative analysis, initial noisy outputs remain
uncorrected, resulting in a sharp performance decline.
Robustness to geometric perturbations. To test the
stability of CCF grounding, we translate and rotate the in-
put of the object completion task (transforming the ground
truth accordingly) and compare against the Claude baseline
in Tab. 4. Both methods are equally accurate on the unper-
turbed input, but 3D-Prog holds a constant 0.02 Chamfer
distance under every translation and the 15◦rotation, and
0.07 at 30◦, whereas the baseline degrades by up to 22×
and fluctuates unpredictably between perturbation magni-
tudes. Only at 45◦do both methods degrade similarly.
4.3. 3D Programming Across VLM Families
To evaluate how broadly 3D-Prog can transform 2D VLMs
into 3D programmers, we benchmark it on various closed-
source and open-source 2D VLMs. As shown in Tab. 5, 3D-
Prog yields consistent improvements across diverse VLM
families, both closed-source and open-source.
Open-source vs closed-source VLMs for 3D program-
Table 5. 3D-Prog across various VLMs on object completion,
with state-of-the-art open- and closed-source 2D VLMs as back-
bones.
Baseline
3D-Prog (Ours)
Metric
Sonnet 4.5
GPT-5.1
Gemini 3 Pro
Sonnet 4.5
Kimi K2.5
Chamfer ↓
0.42
0.23
0.25
0.19
0.16
Table 6. Comparisons to 3D VLMs. 3D-Prog outperforms Gaus-
sianVLM [18] on both SQA3D and Nr3D.
Claude
GaussianVLM
3D-Prog
SQA3D (Accuracy ↑)
30%
50%
60%
Nr3D (METEOR ↑)
0.16
0.22
0.23
ming. Our benchmark of open-source VLMs includes Kimi
K2.5, Llama 4 [39], and Qwen3-VL-30B-A3B-Instruct [4].
Of these models, only Kimi K2.5 demonstrates the required
Python code generation capabilities and adaptability to the
USD format. The failure of other models to produce valid
outputs or process 3D data highlights a gap in open-source
models for geometry-aware code generation.
Although
open-source VLMs like Qwen and Llama have sufficient
visual understanding, they lack adequate coding/program-
ming expertise for these tasks.
However, the promising
results from Kimi K2.5 suggest that high-performance 3D
programming is becoming increasingly attainable within
open-source frameworks.
4.4. Comparisons to 3D VLMs
We evaluate the performance of 3D-Prog against a state-
of-the-art 3D VLM [18] across two primary dimensions:
scene-level and object-level 3D understanding. For scene-
level evaluation, we assess the model’s ability to per-
form situated reasoning using the SQA3D benchmark [34],
which requires interpreting complex environments from a
specified egocentric perspective (e.g., “I am sitting on the
bed facing the chair. What is to my direct left?”). Object-
7


Distribution of Points
Density HeatMap
TAF Iteration 2
Cumulative height distribution
TAF Iteration 3
Real Scan PointCloud
{"name": "Table 1 (Large central
table)",
"bounding_box": {
"min": [1.30, 1.75, 0.02],
"max": [4.15, 3.95, 0.85],
"size": [2.84, 2.2, 0.83]
}}
{"name": "Table 2 (Small table)",
"bounding_box": {
      "min": [3.45, 0.04, 0.03],
      "max": [4.71, 1.05, 0.85],
      "size": [1.26, 1.0, 0.82]
}}
Answer
Prompt
"Detect the table
in the scene."
Figure 5. TAF across iterations for table detection in a scanned scene. Early iterations produce two cues: a density heatmap of points at
typical table height (candidate footprints) and a height distribution (expected vertical extent). The next iteration restricts the analysis to the
extracted footprint and uses the height distribution and its cumulative counterpart for noise rejection, yielding the final 3D bounding box.
level capabilities are evaluated on object captioning, where
the model is provided with object bounding boxes and
tasked with generating captions for the corresponding ob-
jects using the Nr3D benchmark [1]. Performance is mea-
sured using accuracy for SQA3D and the METEOR [5]
captioning metric for Nr3D. We compare 3D-Prog with the
Claude 2D VLM baseline and GaussianVLM, a generalist
3D VLM [18]. Results in Tab. 6 show that our training-free
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art 3D VLM specifi-
cally trained on these datasets and tasks.
4.5. Discussion of Experiments
The analysis of 3D-Prog reveals that CCF is essential for
tasks fundamentally rooted in geometric reasoning, e.g.,
object completion or compositional generation.
In these
settings, resolving gauge ambiguity and providing spatial
grounding enable 3D-Prog to converge to a solution con-
sistently over multiple iterations. As expected, for tasks
that primarily require appearance changes without geomet-
ric adaptations (e.g., simple object editing), the baseline
model can achieve a reasonable success score by mapping
the task to the 2D domain. Nevertheless, even in these sce-
narios, our approach outperforms the baseline, showcasing
that additional feedback is consistently beneficial.
In a detailed analysis, we observe that visual feedback
produced by the TAF module shows a strong degree of spe-
cialization tailored to the specific user query and task cate-
gory. TAF demonstrates the ability to construct specialized
visual feedback, generate complex NumPy code, and em-
ploy classical ML algorithms such as clustering for segmen-
tation tasks. Furthermore, TAF exhibits an inherently evo-
lutionary nature: across successive iterations, its outputs be-
come increasingly fine-grained by leveraging insights from
preceding passes. This evolution from broad analysis to fo-
cused refinement is exemplified in the table detection task
(Fig. 5). The first iteration generates general cues based on
universal rules, while in subsequent iterations, the model
shifts to focused asset-specific region analysis. Additional
qualitative examples of TAF and a comprehensive failure
analysis for both 3D-Prog and the baseline are provided in
the Supplementary Material (Sec. D, E).
Across evaluation tasks, 3D-Prog converges in 7–20 iter-
ations (mean: 11), with each iteration taking approximately
22s on average. Total runtime ranges from around 2 minutes
for articulation and QA tasks to 8 minutes for segmentation.
VLM inference dominates compute, followed by code ex-
ecution and rendering. A detailed per-task breakdown is
provided in the Supplementary Material.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we presented 3D-Prog, a generalizable ap-
proach that enables 2D VLMs to perform 3D tasks, includ-
ing understanding, reasoning, editing, composition, and
generation.
3D-Prog achieves this through CCF, which
enables grounding and 3D perception in 2D VLMs, and
TAF, which encompasses a flexible scratch-space for task-
specific feedback. Experiments further showcased that 3D-
Prog is a powerful generalist framework that brings the ca-
pabilities of current 2D VLMs to free-form 3D program-
ming, unlocking the potential of VLMs for 3D tasks. We
demonstrated the versatility and generalizability of 3D-Prog
across a diverse set of tasks on both real and synthetic
assets, where it consistently and reliably produces high-
quality 3D outputs and achieves precise 3D understanding.
Limitations.
Although powerful, 3D-Prog is not without
limitations. First, by design, the performance of 3D-Prog
depends on the capabilities of the underlying VLMs, which
still struggle with very complex reasoning tasks or fine-
grained details. Second, 3D-Prog relies on a judge module
that evaluates convergence rather than correctness. While
100% motion-type accuracy on articulation suggests the it-
erative loop is self-correcting, the judge may occasionally
accept suboptimal results. We mitigate this through con-
servative iteration limits and visual comparison feedback.
Lastly, 3D-Prog’s ability to process 3D assets relies on the
CCF, which is limited in scene size and detail by the VLM
context. However, with the fast progress in open and closed
VLMs, our method has a clear path towards scaling beyond
its current performance.
8


Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded by the Ministry of Edu-
cation and Science of Bulgaria (support for INSAIT, part of
the Bulgarian National Roadmap for Research Infrastruc-
ture).
References
[1] P. Achlioptas et al.
ReferIt3D: Neural listeners for fine-
grained 3d object identification in real-world scenes. ECCV,
2020. 8, 13
[2] Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan
Klein.
Neural module networks.
2016 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
39–48, 2015. 3
[3] Anthropic.
Introducing claude sonnet 4.5.
https://
www.anthropic.com/news/claude-sonnet-4-
5, 2025. Accessed: 2025-11-13. 2, 6
[4] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui
Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao,
Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang,
Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhao-
hai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin, Jun-
yang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu,
Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu
Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang
Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jian-
qiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yux-
uan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu,
Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen
Yu, Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen
Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu,
and Ke Zhu. Qwen3-vl technical report, 2025. 7
[5] Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic
metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation with hu-
man judgments. ACL workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic
evaluation measures for machine translation and/or summa-
rization, 2005. 8
[6] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail,
Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom,
Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π 0: A vision-language-
action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.24164, 2024. 2
[7] Jake Bruce, Michael D Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack
Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes, Matthew Lai,
Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, et al. Ge-
nie: Generative interactive environments. In Forty-first Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 2
[8] Boyuan Chen, Zhuo Xu, Sean Kirmani, Brain Ichter, Dorsa
Sadigh, Leonidas Guibas, and Fei Xia. Spatialvlm: Endow-
ing vision-language models with spatial reasoning capabili-
ties. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 14455–
14465, 2024. 2
[9] Sijin Chen, Xin Chen, Chi Zhang, Mingsheng Li, Gang
Yu, Hao Fei, Hongyuan Zhu, Jiayuan Fan, and Tao Chen.
Ll3da:
Visual interactive instruction tuning for omni-3d
understanding reasoning and planning.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 26428–26438, 2024. 2, 3
[10] Xingyu Chen, Fu-Jen Chu, Pierre Gleize, Kevin J Liang,
Alexander Sax, Hao Tang, Weiyao Wang, Michelle Guo,
Thibaut Hardin, Xiang Li, et al. Sam 3d: 3dfy anything in
images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16624, 2025. 15
[11] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice
Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blis-
tein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5:
Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality,
long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.06261, 2025. 2, 6
[12] Angela Dai, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Hal-
ber, Thomas A. Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner. Scannet:
Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. 2017
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR), pages 2432–2443, 2017. 12, 13
[13] Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo,
Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Christian Laforte,
Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, et al. Objaverse-xl: A
universe of 10m+ 3d objects. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2023. 5, 13
[14] Matt Deitke, Christopher Clark, Sangho Lee, Rohun Tri-
pathi, Yue Yang, Jae Sung Park, Mohammadreza Salehi,
Niklas Muennighoff, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini, et al. Molmo
and pixmo: Open weights and open data for state-of-the-art
vision-language models.
In Proceedings of the Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pages 91–104,
2025. 2
[15] Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi.
Visual pro-
gramming: Compositional visual reasoning without training.
2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), pages 14953–14962, 2022. 3
[16] Huy Ha and Shuran Song.
Semantic abstraction: Open-
world 3d scene understanding from 2d vision-language mod-
els. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022. 2
[17] Anna-Maria Halacheva, Yang Miao, Jan-Nico Zaech, Xi
Wang, Luc Van Gool, and Danda Pani Paudel. Articulate3d:
Holistic understanding of 3d scenes as universal scene de-
scription.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2025. 2, 5, 13
[18] Anna-Maria
Halacheva,
Jan-Nico
Zaech,
Xi
Wang,
Danda Pani Paudel, and Luc Van Gool.
Gaussianvlm:
Scene-centric 3d vision-language models using language-
aligned gaussian splats for embodied reasoning and beyond.
IEEE Robotics Autom. Lett., 10(12):12588–12595, 2025. 2,
3, 7, 8
[19] Yining Hong, Haoyu Zhen, Peihao Chen, Shuhong Zheng,
et al.
3d-llm: Injecting the 3d world into large language
models. NeurIPS, 2023.
[20] Haifeng Huang, Yilun Chen, Zehan Wang, Rongjie Huang,
Runsen Xu, et al. Chat-scene: Bridging 3d scene and large
language models with object identifiers. NeurIPS, 2024. 2,
3
[21] Jiangyong Huang, Silong Yong, Xiaojian Ma, Xiongkun
Linghu, Puhao Li, et al. An embodied generalist agent in
3d world. In ICML, 2024. 2
9


[22] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perel-
man, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Weli-
hinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024. 2
[23] Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Alihusein Kuwajerwala,
Qiao Gu, Mohd Omama, Tao Chen, Shuang Li, Ganesh Iyer,
Soroush Saryazdi, Nikhil Keetha, Ayush Tewari, Joshua B.
Tenenbaum, Celso Miguel de Melo, Madhava Krishna, Liam
Paull, Florian Shkurti, and Antonio Torralba. Conceptfusion:
Open-set multimodal 3d mapping. Robotics: Science and
Systems (RSS), 2023. 2
[24] Baoxiong Jia, Yixin Chen, Huangyue Yu, Yan Wang,
Xuesong Niu, Tengyu Liu, Qing Li, and Siyuan Huang.
Sceneverse:
Scaling 3d vision-language learning for
grounded scene understanding. In European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), 2024. 2
[25] Mukul Khanna, Yongsen Mao, Hanxiao Jiang, Sanjay
Haresh, Brennan Shacklett, Dhruv Batra, Alexander Clegg,
Eric Undersander, Angel X Chang, and Manolis Savva.
Habitat synthetic scenes dataset (hssd-200): An analysis of
3d scene scale and realism tradeoffs for objectgoal naviga-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 16384–16393,
2024. 2
[26] Hyunjin Kim and Minhyuk Sung. Partstad: 2d-to-3d part
segmentation task adaptation. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, 2024. 2
[27] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao,
Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P
Foster, Pannag R Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar,
Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey
Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. OpenVLA: An open-
source vision-language-action model. In 8th Annual Confer-
ence on Robot Learning, 2024. 2
[28] Kimi. Kimi k2.5: Visual agentic intelligence. https://
www.kimi.com/blog/kimi-k2-5.html, 2026. 6
[29] Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, and Jerome Revaud. Ground-
ing image matching in 3d with mast3r, 2024. 3
[30] Mingsheng Li, Xin Chen, Chi Zhang, Sijin Chen, Hongyuan
Zhu, et al. M3dbench: Towards omni 3d assistant with inter-
leaved multi-modal instructions. ECCV, 2025. 3
[31] Yangguang Li, Zi-Xin Zou, Zexiang Liu, Dehu Wang, Yuan
Liang, Zhipeng Yu, Xingchao Liu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Ding
Liang, Wanli Ouyang, et al. Triposg: High-fidelity 3d shape
synthesis using large-scale rectified flow models.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.06608, 2025. 2, 3
[32] Gabrielle Littlefair, Niladri Shekhar Dutt, and Niloy J Mi-
tra. Flairgpt: Repurposing llms for interior designs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.04648, 2025. 3
[33] Anran Liu, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Xiaoxiao Long, Zhiyang
Dou, Hao-Xiang Guo, Ping Luo, and Wenping Wang.
Part123: Part-aware 3d reconstruction from a single-view
image. ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, 2024.
2
[34] Xiaojian Ma, Silong Yong, Zilong Zheng, Qing Li, Yitao
Liang, et al.
Sqa3d: Situated question answering in 3d
scenes. In ICLR, 2023. 2, 7, 13
[35] Dimitrios
Mallis,
Ahmet
Serda
Karadeniz,
Sebastian
Cavada, Danila Rukhovich, Niki Foteinopoulou, Kseniya
Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada.
Cad-
assistant: tool-augmented vllms as generic cad task solvers.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 7284–7294, 2025. 3
[36] Yongsen Mao, Junhao Zhong, Chuan Fang, Jia Zheng, Rui
Tang, Hao Zhu, Ping Tan, and Zihan Zhou. Spatiallm: Train-
ing large language models for structured indoor modeling. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
3
[37] Damiano Marsili, Rohun Agrawal, Yisong Yue, and Georgia
Gkioxari. Visual agentic ai for spatial reasoning with a dy-
namic api. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition Conference (CVPR), pages 19446–19455,
2025. 3
[38] Guofeng Mei, Wei Lin, Luigi Riz, Yujiao Wu, Fabio Poiesi,
and Yiming Wang. Perla: Perceptive 3d language assistant.
In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion Conference, pages 14369–14379, 2025. 2, 3
[39] Meta.
The llama 4 herd:
The beginning of a new
era of natively multimodal ai innovation.
https :
//ai.meta.com/blog/llama-4-multimodal-
intelligence/, 2025. Accessed: 2026-03-01. 7
[40] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl
Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey
Hejna, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, Tobias Kreiman, You
Liang Tan, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Pannag Sanketi, Quan
Vuong, Ted Xiao, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
Levine.
Octo:
An open-source generalist robot policy.
In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems, Delft,
Netherlands, 2024. 2
[41] OpenAI. Introducing gpt-5.2. https://openai.com/
index/introducing-gpt-5-2/, 2025.
Accessed:
2026-03-02. 6
[42] Songyou Peng, Kyle Genova, Chiyu ”Max” Jiang, An-
drea Tagliasacchi, Marc Pollefeys, and Thomas Funkhouser.
Openscene: 3d scene understanding with open vocabularies.
In CVPR, 2023. 2
[43] Yawen Shao, Wei Zhai, Yuhang Yang, Hongchen Luo, Yang
Cao, and Zheng-Jun Zha. Great: Geometry-intention collab-
orative inference for open-vocabulary 3d object affordance
grounding. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition Conference, pages 17326–17336, 2025. 2
[44] Pixar Animation Studios. Kitchen set – universal scene de-
scription (usd). https://openusd.org/release/
dl_kitchen_set.html, 2021. Accessed: 2025-11-13.
5, 13
[45] D’idac Sur’is, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt:
Visual inference via python execution for reasoning. 2023
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 11854–11864, 2023. 3
[46] Tencent Hunyuan3D Team. Hunyuan3d 2.0: Scaling diffu-
sion models for high resolution textured 3d assets generation,
2025. 2, 3
[47] Michael Tschannen, Alexey Gritsenko, Xiao Wang, Muham-
mad Ferjad Naeem, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, et al. Siglip
10


2:
Multilingual vision-language encoders with improved
semantic understanding, localization, and dense features.
arXiv:2502.14786, 2025. 2
[48] Austin Wang, ZeMing Gong, and Angel X Chang. Vigil3d:
A linguistically diverse dataset for 3d visual grounding. In
Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 30453–30475, 2025. 3
[49] Jianyuan Wang, Minghao Chen, Nikita Karaev, Andrea
Vedaldi, Christian Rupprecht, and David Novotny.
Vggt:
Visual geometry grounded transformer. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 5294–5306, 2025. 3
[50] Shuzhe Wang,
Vincent Leroy,
Yohann Cabon,
Boris
Chidlovskii, and Jerome Revaud. Dust3r: Geometric 3d vi-
sion made easy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
20697–20709, 2024. 3
[51] Jihan Yang, Shusheng Yang, Anjali W Gupta, Rilyn Han,
Li Fei-Fei, and Saining Xie. Thinking in space: How mul-
timodal large language models see, remember, and recall
spaces. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Conference, pages 10632–10643, 2025. 2
[52] Chandan Yeshwanth, Yueh-Cheng Liu, Matthias Nießner,
and Angela Dai. Scannet++: A high-fidelity dataset of 3d
indoor scenes. In ICCV, 2023. 5, 12, 13
[53] Haocheng Yuan, Jing Xu, Hao Pan, Adrien Bousseau,
Niloy J Mitra, and Changjian Li.
Cadtalk: An algorithm
and benchmark for semantic commenting of cad programs.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3753–3762, 2024. 3
[54] Renrui Zhang, Ziyu Guo, Wei Zhang, Kunchang Li, Xu-
peng Miao, Bin Cui, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and Hongsheng Li.
Pointclip: Point cloud understanding by clip. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 8552–8562, 2022. 2
[55] Mingrui Zhao, Yizhi Wang, Fenggen Yu, Changqing Zou,
and Ali Mahdavi-Amiri. Sweepnet: Unsupervised learning
shape abstraction via neural sweepers. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, 2024. 2
[56] Hongyan Zhi, Peihao Chen, Junyan Li, Shuailei Ma, Xinyu
Sun, Tianhang Xiang, Yinjie Lei, Mingkui Tan, and Chuang
Gan. Lscenellm: Enhancing large 3d scene understanding
using adaptive visual preferences.
In Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pages
3761–3771, 2025. 2
[57] Ziyu Zhu, Xiaojian Ma, Yixin Chen, Zhidong Deng, et al.
3d-vista: Pre-trained transformer for 3d vision and text align-
ment. CVPR, 2023. 2
[58] Ziyu Zhu, Zhuofan Zhang, Xiaojian Ma, Xuesong Niu, Yixin
Chen, Baoxiong Jia, Zhidong Deng, Siyuan Huang, and Qing
Li. Unifying 3d vision-language understanding via prompt-
able queries. ECCV, 2024. 3
11


Supplementary Material
We provide an extended analysis and implementation de-
tails to support the main manuscript. The supplementary
material is organized as follows: Sec. A provides a detailed
task taxonomy and dataset licenses.
Sec. B reports per-
task runtime statistics. Sec. C presents the methodology
of our user study. We then provide a detailed TAF analysis
(Sec. D), followed by a qualitative error analysis (Sec. E) to
investigate current limitations. We further expand the scope
of our evaluation with qualitative results in Sec. F. We con-
clude by detailing the specific design choices (Sec. G), in-
cluding the core algorithm and full prompt specifications.
A. Task Overview
We demonstrate 3D-Prog across nine tasks spanning gen-
eration, understanding, and reasoning. Tab. S1 provides a
detailed breakdown of each task, its description, and input
asset types.
Dataset Licenses and Terms of Use.
We report the li-
censes and terms of use for the datasets used in our evalua-
tion in Tab. S2 and adhere strictly to each. All datasets are
publicly available. We draw attention to ScanNet [12]1 and
ScanNet++ [52]2 being subject to custom terms of use that
require separate inspection, and to the Pixar Kitchen Set,
which is distributed under Pixar’s non-commercial USD as-
set license.
B. Runtime Analysis
We report runtime statistics for 3D-Prog across select eval-
uation tasks in Tab. S3. Measurements were collected on an
NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPU with 32 GB of memory.
C. User Study
User studies with four independent evaluators assessed 3D-
Prog’s performance on object editing and compositional
reasoning tasks. Evaluators scored each VLM-generated
3D asset from 0 to 5, following five predefined task-specific
success criteria. For each instance, the evaluators were pro-
vided with the user prompt and the 3D visualization of the
generated asset in a 3D USD visualizer. For object editing,
the input 3D asset was also provided to check for geometry
preservation. The final task performance was the average
score from the four evaluators.
Compositional reasoning criteria cover semantics, orien-
tation, color/material accuracy, structure, and composition
1Available at https://kaldir.vc.in.tum.de/scannet/
ScanNet_TOS.pdf (last accessed: 27 August 2026).
2Available at https://kaldir.vc.in.tum.de/scannetpp/
static/scannetpp-terms-of-use.pdf (last accessed: 27 Au-
gust 2026).
(detailed in Tab. S4). Object editing criteria include ge-
ometry preservation, material accuracy, realism of physical
properties, scope accuracy, and visual realism (detailed in
Tab. S5).
Analysis of the evaluators’ scores shows that in com-
positional reasoning, the baseline suffered from mesh in-
tersections, incorrect orientations, and indistinguishable se-
mantics, particularly when handling non-cubic primitives.
Its success was limited to color and material attributes. In
contrast, 3D-Prog achieved consistently high performance
across all criteria. Regarding object editing, evaluators re-
ported comparable visual quality between methods; how-
ever, the baseline consistently failed to execute physical
property corrections.
D. TAF Analysis
In this section, we conduct a thorough analysis of the TAF
component, with Sec. D.1 providing an inspection of the
TAF feedback mechanism and Sec. D.2 giving an in-depth
walkthrough of an example rollout of 3D-Prog on the se-
mantic segmentation task with a 3-step iterative refinement.
D.1. Structure of TAF Outputs
TAF is a central component of 3D-Prog, enabling it to (a)
extract semantic knowledge from VLMs, (b) reason about
task execution in an iterative closed loop, thereby improv-
ing geometric fidelity and performance with respect to the
number of iterations, and (c) address open-ended tasks.
We conducted a manual inspection of the 3D-Prog logs
to analyze the capabilities of the TAF. The typical format
of TAF follows the structure below, where each component
exhibits distinct capabilities.
• Analysis: As instructed in the prompt, the VLMs per-
form both visual and structural (geometric) analysis for
the given tasks, largely independent of the task specifics.
This includes (a) inferring the axis of the 3D asset, (b)
visually estimating shapes, sizes, and semantically iden-
tifying the 3D assets, and (c) inspecting the bounds of the
asset.
• 3D Programming: Uses the results of the analysis to
carry out highly task-specific operations. Several steps
may be carried out to gather more details about the as-
set, including (a) geometric filtering to remove noise, (b)
finding the region of interest and visually zooming in, (c)
PCA of the asset to estimate the canonical pose and the
axis of symmetry, and (d) clustering objects and analyz-
ing the individual clusters.
• Reasoning: Based on the analysis and the 3D program-
ming outputs, the model draws conclusions that guide the
next steps of the iteration. This typically involves (a) find-
ing flaws in the analysis and the 3D programming (e.g.,
DBSCAN clusters are too coarse); (b) providing candi-
12


Table S1. Summary of 3D programming tasks we demonstrate, spanning generation, understanding, and reasoning over 3D assets.
Task
Description
Input Asset
Generation
Object Completion
Complete partial object geometry into complete shapes.
3D object
synthetic [13, 44]
Scan2Sim
Convert a real-world scan into a simplified simulation-
ready asset.
3D object
scan [17]
Understanding
Object Detection
(Spatial)
Detect and localize objects with bounding boxes for per-
ception or manipulation tasks.
3D scene scan/
synthetic [44, 52]
Object Part Segmentation
(Geometric)
Segment objects into parts or sub-components with se-
mantic and/or instance labels.
3D object
synthetic [13, 44]
Object Editing
(Visual)
Modify object textures and materials; adjust object pose or
placement at scene level.
3D object
synthetic [13, 44]
Situated QA
(Contextual)
Spatial reasoning from a situated perspective.
3D scene
scan [34]
Object Captioning
(Semantic-Spatial)
Given a 3D scene scan and a 3D bounding box of an object
within it, caption the object.
3D scene
scan [1]
Reasoning
Compositional Reasoning
Build a coherent scene from a given set of objects by rea-
soning about spatial and semantic relationships.
Text prompt
(opt. 3D objects)
Articulation Prediction
Given a 3D scene and a point marking a movable com-
ponent, the model predicts the motion axis of the marked
part.
3D scene
scan [17]
Table S2. Licenses and terms of use for datasets employed in our
study.
Dataset
License / Terms of Use
SQA3D [34]
Apache 2.0
Nr3D [1]
MIT
ScanNet [12]
ScanNet Terms of Use
ScanNet++ [52]
ScanNet++ Terms of Use
Articulate3D [17]
CC BY 4.0
Objaverse-XL [13]
ODC-By 1.0 (per-object licenses vary)
Pixar Kitchen Set [44]
Pixar non-commercial asset license
Table S3. Runtime analysis. Total time in seconds. Per-iteration
time includes VLM inference (∼60%), code execution (∼25%),
and rendering (∼15%). Tasks requiring finer geometric reasoning
(segmentation) use more iterations than semantic tasks (QA, cap-
tioning).
Task
Avg. Iter.
Total (s)
Per Iter. (s)
Object Completion
12.7
265
21
Object Detection
12.0
287
24
Semantic Seg.
19.2
446
23
Object Captioning
7.4
216
29
Situated QA
9.8
195
20
Articulation
7.3
125
17
Average
11.4
256
22
date solutions to resolve these flaws (reducing the DB-
SCAN ϵ for fine-grained clusters).
• Visual Validation: The final stage involves visually in-
specting the output to verify its correctness and validating
the geometry and semantics of the asset.
Table S4. Success criteria for compositional reasoning.
Criterion
Description
Semantics
The overall compositional structure and scene semantics must
exactly match task instructions from multi-angle inspection.
Orientation
& Alignment
Objects with implied directionality must be oriented realisti-
cally and consistently with natural placement or user require-
ments.
Color
& Material
Objects must have the correct specified colors.
Structure
No unrealistic overlapping or intersection of objects unless
explicitly required by the task.
Composition
Objects must maintain correct compositional relationships
(e.g., stacked/contained objects must not float or clip).
Table S5. Success criteria for object editing.
Criterion
Description
Geometry
Preservation
The object’s underlying geometry must remain exactly the
same as the original (incl. proportions, rotations, translations,
etc.).
Material
Accuracy
The edited material must visually match the intended type.
Physical
Properties
Roughness, density, metallic, specular properties, etc. must
be correct.
Scope
Accuracy
The edit is correctly implemented over the specified scope,
regardless of whether that scope is the entire object or a lo-
calized part.
Visual
Realism
The object must behave visually in a way consistent with the
intended material (e.g., proper metallic reflectivity, ceramic
glossiness). Highlights and reflections must behave correctly.
13


D.2. Iterative Refinement Case Study: Semantic
Segmentation
We perform a case study investigating the TAF visualiza-
tions across different 3D-Prog iterations. For the case study,
we consider a semantic segmentation task on a synthetic
tea kettle instance provided as a point cloud, as shown in
Fig. S1.
Iteration 1: Initial Analysis and Hypothesis Formula-
tion.
The first visual program checked the asset’s up-axis
and traversed the stage hierarchy, establishing that the asset
contains a single mesh. Subsequently, the VLM calculated
the bounding box and formulated an initial hypothesis that
the semantic parts of the kettle are Main Body, Lid, Spout,
Handle, and Kettle Base. The generated TAF was a 6-panel
plot showing front, right, and top views, two 3D views, and
a height distribution histogram.
The generated multi-view point-cloud analysis visualiza-
tion was utilized to confirm the initial hypothesis regarding
the presence of the five target components and to establish
the basis for segmentation using Z (height) and R (radial
distance from the XY centroid) as primary features.
Iteration 2: Segmentation and Validation.
The initial
segmentation algorithm employed geometric filtering for
the Base and Lid (top 20% of Z-range). The middle sec-
tion was separated into the Body (points within the 70th
percentile radial distance) and an outer region.
The outer points were subjected to DBSCAN clustering
to distinguish the Spout and Handle based on size and verti-
cal spread. The second TAF, a 6-panel visualization with
semantically colored points, was generated for visual in-
spection.
Iteration 3: Refinement with Enhanced Spatial Heuris-
tics.
The visual inspection of the TAF showed under-
segmentation on the Lid and Main Body parts, as well as
over-segmentation on the Handle. The VLM refined the ini-
tial segmentation algorithm with the following adjustments:
1. Threshold Adjustment: Height thresholds for the Base
and Lid were slightly narrowed (12% and 18%, respec-
tively), and the radial threshold was increased to the 75th
percentile to ensure the Handle and Spout were fully
contained within the outer region.
2. Refined Clustering: DBSCAN parameters were adjusted
to eps=2.5 and min samples=3 for improved den-
sity sensitivity.
3. Geometric Differentiation Heuristics: The critical refine-
ment was the application of post-DBSCAN geometric
heuristics to definitively classify each resulting cluster as
either the Spout or the Handle. The Handle was identi-
fied by its arc shape and vertical dominance, whereas the
Spout was identified by its relatively compact and linear
protrusion.
The legend of the analyzed TAF from iteration 2 also
reveals a semantic labeling error—the segment labels were
distributed incorrectly (e.g., the Handle was called “Lid”,
the Spout was labeled as “Handle”). This inconsistency was
obvious in the legend of the plot, but the VLM failed to
attend to this non-geometric metadata and did not attempt
to correct it, retaining the segment’s misclassification.
The third TAF is another panel with different views of
the semantically colored point cloud, which confirmed the
successful geometric segmentation. Crucially, while the ge-
ometric output was correct, the VLM did not self-correct
the initial semantic labeling error, and the components re-
mained incorrectly labeled. Notably, this failure to self-
correct the labeling is observed very rarely and may be
linked to the complexity of the task and to the VLM hal-
lucinations.
E. Error Analysis
For each of the runs, we manually inspect the breakdown
of the error modes of 3D-Prog. This analysis is essential
to understand both the strengths of our method and its cur-
rent limitations. We categorize the primary error modes as
follows:
• Incorrect Program: The most common failure mode is
the method producing erroneous code or invalid USD as-
set formats. This error mode is more common in the base-
line system, often resulting in outputs that cannot be ren-
dered. Iterative feedback significantly reduces these is-
sues in 3D-Prog.
• Insufficient Geometric Fidelity: The final output some-
times lacks fine-grained geometric details. In some cases,
3D-Prog oversimplifies the geometry, behaving “lazily”
and failing to capture intricate structures. The indepen-
dent judge helps reduce this issue by enforcing stronger
critical feedback.
• Trivial Mistakes by Hallucination: These occur when
there is a mismatch between the model’s analysis and its
final output. In a few runs, 3D-Prog correctly reasons
about the scene but fails to transfer the same findings into
the generated output, mainly due to hallucinations in the
VLMs, as illustrated by the example in Sec. D.2.
F. Qualitative Results
We present additional qualitative results in Fig. S2 to further
demonstrate the capabilities of our proposed framework. In
object editing, 3D-Prog successfully modifies both the ap-
pearance and physical characteristics. For object detection,
we demonstrate the identification of chairs within a clut-
tered environment, effectively handling incomplete scans
and multiple true positives. Finally, we highlight 3D-Prog’s
14


B
A
Height Distribution
3D View
TAF Iteration 1
Tea Kettle PointCloud
Answer
Detect and
categorize the parts
of the object.
Prompt
TAF Iteration 2
Segmentation, Front View
Segmentation, Front View
TAF Iteration 3
Figure S1. TAF Visualizations Across Iterations. The first iteration focuses on initial analysis for object understanding and label set
prediction. In the second iteration, the TAF visualizes the initial segmentation of the tea kettle. We observe that the first segmentation
exhibits over-segmentation (A), as well as under-segmentation issues (B). Those issues are detected by the VLM through the TAF and
refined in the third iteration.
Figure S2. Qualitative Results on 3D Object Editing, 3D Ob-
ject Detection, and Scan2Sim Tasks. For object editing, 3D-Prog
generates a new USD asset with edited appearance and the corre-
sponding physical properties. For object detection, the output is
a list of bounding boxes in textual format, and in Scan2Sim the
generated asset is the USD file of the simplified object.
ability to simultaneously perform scan simplification and
completion to produce simulation-ready assets across di-
verse object classes and sizes.
F.1. 3D-Prog for 3D Programming in the Wild
We further validate 3D-Prog on self-captured real images
taken in the wild with a phone camera. The first apple is
reconstructed using SAM 3D [10]. Then we run 3D-Prog
for various tasks, namely a) Generation and scene compo-
sition: to generate and place the table. The table needs to
be of reasonable dimensions and texture. b) Object editing:
to generate another apple and make its texture metallic. We
show results in Fig. S3, where the table and the second ap-
ple are generated by 3D-Prog.
Figure S3. Zero-shot 3D-Prog results using self-captured RGB
images.
G. Design Choices
In this section, we detail the specific implementation
strategies. First, we elaborate on the 3D-Prog algorithm
(Sec. G.1), and in Sec. G.2 we provide the full prompts uti-
lized within the framework.
G.1. 3D-Prog Algorithm
In this section, we provide the complete algorithmic frame-
work. Specifically, Algorithm 1 details the Visual Reason-
ing for 3D Programming process. This algorithm formal-
izes how the system repeatedly uses multi-view visual feed-
back to:
1. Analyze the target or generated geometry.
2. Generate Universal Scene Description (USD) code for
model manipulation.
3. Execute the code to produce a new 3D model.
4. Compare the output against a reference.
5. Generate corrective feedback for the VLM.
6. Evaluate the final result for task compliance.
This iterative structure ensures that the VLM is guided by
continuous visual and textual feedback until the generated
USD model M satisfies the task requirements T.
G.2. Full Prompts for 3D-Prog
In this section, we detail the prompt structure for 3D-Prog.
3D-Prog includes iterative prompting of the 2D VLM acting
as a “programmer” and the judge module.
15


(a) Input asset
(b) Generated asset
(c) Initial visual prompt (iter. 1)
(d) Comparative visual feedback (iter. >1)
Figure S4. Visual prompt for 3D-Prog. (a) Input asset and (b) the asset generated in iteration 1. (c) The initial visual prompt after CCF:
six orthographic views with depth-mapping. (d) The comparative visual feedback used from the second iteration on: six orthographic
views overlaying the current generated asset (cyan) on the reference asset (red, when available). The complete visual prompt for iterations
>1 additionally contains the TAF image, which varies with the task and iteration.
Algorithm 1 Visual Reasoning for 3D Programming
Require: Reference model R (optional), Task specifi-
cation T, VLM V
Ensure: Generated USD model M satisfying task re-
quirements
1: I ←RenderMultiView(R)
▷6 orthographic
views; ∅if no R
2: iteration ←0; feedback ←∅
3: repeat
4:
iteration ←iteration + 1
5:
A ←V.AnalyzeGeometry(I, T, feedback)
▷
Extract geometric features
6:
code ←V.GenerateUSD(A)
▷Generate
manipulation code
7:
M ←Execute(code)
▷Create/modify USD
geometry
8:
Igen ←RenderMultiView(M); C ←Igen
9:
if R exists then
10:
C ←CompareVisual(M, R)
▷Overlay
comparison
11:
feedback ←V.AnalyzeDiscrepancy(C)
12:
else
13:
feedback ←V.EvaluateQuality(Igen)
14:
end if
15:
approved ←Judge.Evaluate(M, T, C)
16: until
approved
or
iteration
≥
MAX ITERATIONS
17: return M
2D VLM Prompts.
Visual Prompt. The initial visual
prompt (Fig. S4c) is a composite image that consolidates
six orthographic views of the asset.
For every subsequent iteration, the visual prompt be-
comes a two-part feedback mechanism designed to guide
the VLM toward correction and refinement:
1. Comparative Visual Feedback (Fig. S4d): This first im-
age provides a standardized direct comparison through
six orthographic views. It plots the currently generated
3D asset and the reference asset (when available) follow-
ing CCF. This visual overlay enables the VLM to readily
identify and localize geometric discrepancies between
its output and the target shape.
2. The second image is the TAF, which is dynamic and
task-dependent. This feedback image contains targeted
visual or textual information relevant to the specific error
or refinement required in that iteration.
Textual Prompt. The 2D VLM receives a structured
textual prompt composed of three distinct components:
• System prompt (Prompt 1): Outlines the agent’s capa-
bilities, accessible libraries, I/O methods, and behavior.
Defines CCF rules for 3D geometry understanding.
• USD-core modeling rules (Prompt 2): Provides specific
instructions on using the USD-Core Python library, in-
cluding syntax guidelines and a list of common errors that
frequently lead to compilation failures or invalid USD file
generation.
• User prompt: The task given by the user.
Beginning with the second iteration, the textual prompt
is dynamically augmented by appending judge feedback
(Prompt 4) on the previous iteration’s result to guide the
agent toward convergence on the correct solution.
Prompt 1: System Prompt
Role. You are an AI assistant that generates and executes Python
code for USD 3D modeling.
Communication Style
• Provide detailed descriptions of observations, planning, and
execution.
16


• Clearly explain reasoning and decision-making steps.
• Describe image content with specific visual detail.
• Narrate the problem-solving process step-by-step.
• Balance tool usage with explanatory text.
Important Guidelines
• After executing code, analyze the result and fix any errors be-
fore retrying.
• Request
clarification
using
request user feedback
when necessary.
• Validate results before calling task complete.
• Ask the user for direction when the next step is unclear.
• When analyzing images, describe visual details and use them
to guide code generation.
File Paths
• Always use the provided OUTPUT DIR variable for file out-
puts.
• Do not hardcode file paths or redefine OUTPUT DIR.
• Save
files
using
os.path.join(OUTPUT DIR,
filename).
• The directory is automatically generated in a timestamped
folder under output/.
• All USD files must be saved to OUTPUT DIR for automatic
visualization.
Image and Visualization Workflow
• After analyzing images, reference those observations through-
out the task.
• Generated USD files are automatically visualized by the sys-
tem.
• Wait for automatic visualizations rather than requesting them
again.
• Images, plots, or diagrams may be generated using libraries
such as matplotlib or PIL.
• Saved images are automatically displayed for further analysis.
• Iteratively refine visualizations based on observed results.
Iterative Workflow
Analyze→Visualize→Execute→Visual Feedback→Improve
USD files saved in OUTPUT DIR are automatically visualized
from multiple angles, enabling iterative refinement of model
quality.
Available
Python
Packages.
numpy, pandas,
matplotlib, scipy, PIL (Pillow), math,
random, time, os, sys, pathlib, uuid,
string, re, json, OpenEXR, Imath,
datetime, pxr (Pixar USD)
Prompt 2: USD-Core Modeling Rules
USD-Core Details
Reference Matching
• Bounding boxes must not be used as simplified models.
• Objects must be modeled using their real components (e.g.,
chair legs, seat, backrest).
• Each visible component should be represented with separate
geometry.
• Geometry must match the reference object’s proportions and
structure.
• Do not introduce additional features or simplifications.
Coordinate System
• Always
set
the
stage
to
Z-up:
UsdGeom.SetStageUpAxis(stage,
UsdGeom.Tokens.z).
• USD uses a right-handed coordinate system.
• Axis directions:
– +Z = Up
– +Y = Away from viewer
– +X = Right
• Ensure the coordinate system matches the reference model.
Bounding Box Computation
• Preferred method uses UsdGeom.BBoxCache.
• Extent-based bounding boxes can be used for simple analysis.
• Avoid
functions
such
as
bbox.IsEmpty()
or
bbox.GetBox().
• Bounding boxes may differ from visual geometry; always ver-
ify visually.
Primitive Selection
• UsdGeom.Cube: axis-aligned rectangular shapes only.
• UsdGeom.Cylinder: axis-aligned cylinders only.
• UsdGeom.Sphere: spherical primitives.
• UsdGeom.Mesh: required for rotated, tilted, or complex ge-
ometry.
Rotation Constraints
• Rotated cubes or cylinders are not allowed.
• Any
rotated
geometry
must
be
represented
using
UsdGeom.Mesh.
• Rotation transforms should follow the order:
Translate →Scale →Rotate
• Incorrect transform ordering can distort geometry.
Dimension Analysis
• Extract component measurements from the reference model.
• Record dimensions for each part (e.g., leg height, seat width).
• Use measured ratios to reproduce correct proportions.
• Visual guessing of dimensions should be avoided.
Output Directory Usage
• Never hardcode output paths.
• Use the provided OUTPUT DIR variable.
• Create
files
using
os.path.join(OUTPUT DIR,
filename).
• All generated USD and image files must be saved in this di-
rectory.
Rotation Operations
• Use axis rotations when objects appear tilted or diagonal.
• Example rotations include:
– AddRotateXOp() for pitch
– AddRotateYOp() for yaw
– AddRotateZOp() for roll
• Multi-axis rotations may be used for complex orientations.
Alignment Validation
• Generated models must align with reference objects in all six
views: Front, Back, Left, Right, Top, and Bottom.
• Models must occupy the same 3D space as the reference.
• Scale and orientation must match within a 5% tolerance.
• Any misalignment must be corrected before completing the
task.
Judge Prompt and Feedback.
The visual input provided
to the Judge module is identical to the iterative visual
prompt used by the 2D VLM for iterations > 1. It consists
of two images: (1) Comparative Visual Feedback (Fig. S4d)
17


showing six orthographic views comparing the generated
asset (cyan) and the reference asset (red), and (2) the TAF.
The judge’s textual instructions (Prompt 3) specify the eval-
uation criteria, rules, and response format, and Prompt 4
gives the exact format of its feedback.
Prompt 3: Judge Prompt
Independent Task Completion Evaluation
Role
• Act as an independent judge evaluating whether a task has
been completed successfully.
• Maintain objectivity and avoid bias toward approving comple-
tion.
Inputs
• Original Task: {task description}
• Agent Output: {agent output}
Evaluation Criteria
Task Requirements Fulfillment
• Verify that all aspects of the original task are addressed.
• Identify any missing components or incomplete implementa-
tions.
Quality Assessment
• Determine whether the produced work meets acceptable qual-
ity standards.
• Identify inconsistencies or obvious mistakes.
Code Quality (Programming Tasks)
• Verify that the code is functional and free of errors.
• Evaluate adherence to best practices.
• Detect runtime or logical errors.
Evaluation Rules
• Be highly critical and act as the quality gatekeeper.
• If comparison images are missing for USD tasks, automati-
cally reject completion.
• Visual evidence overrides agent claims.
• If generated and reference models do not visually match, mark
the task as failed.
• Default to rejecting completion unless strong evidence sup-
ports success.
• Statements such as “perfect alignment” must be verified visu-
ally.
• Provide specific and detailed feedback describing observed is-
sues.
• For all 3D/USD tasks, comparison images are mandatory for
approval.
Response Format
Provide the evaluation as JSON:
{
"is_complete": true/false,
"confidence": 0.0-1.0,
"feedback": "detailed explanation",
"errors": ["list", "of", "specific", "errors"],
"suggestions": ["list", "of", "improvements"]
}
Prompt 4: Judge Feedback Format
{
"is_complete": true/false,
"confidence": 0.0-1.0,
"feedback": "detailed explanation of
your evaluation",
,→
"errors": ["list", "of", "specific",
"errors", "found"],
,→
"suggestions": ["list", "of",
"improvement", "suggestions"]
,→
}
18
